# SINBAD DT Source Improvement

Each calculation of the Monte Carlo N-Particle (MCNP) transport code (https://mcnp.lanl.gov) requires a source to be defined. This is accomplished with one of four options: SDEF, KSRC, SSR or the SOURCE Fortran subroutine. The SOURCE subroutine is a user defined method that must be implemented in the MCNP6 source.F90 file. Users must have access to the MCNP source code and rebuild the MCNP executable with the modified source.F90 file. The new MCNP executable can be used without defining the SDEF, KSRC, or SSR cards in the MCNP input file and the SOURCE subroutine will be invoked instead. If the defined source is anisotropic and point detector tallies or DXTRAN are used in an MCNP problem, the SRCDX subroutine is required.

The `source.F` and `srcdx.F` files were released as part of the Shielding Integral Benchmark Archive and Database (SINBAD) (https://www.oecd-nea.org/jcms/pl_32139/sinbad-shielding-integral-benchmark-archive-and-database). These fortran codes were developed for MCNP5 and cannot be used with MCNP6.
The `source.F` file is used to calculate neutron properties (positions, energies, and directions) from deuterium–tritium (D–T) fusion while the `srcdx.F` file is used to compute the probability of a neutron being emitted toward a detector. We have rewritten these files for the MCNP code version 6.3.1.

The `source.F90` and `srcdx.F90` files in this repository were updated from `source.F` and `srcdx.F` files released with SINBAD.

The `SOURCE` subroutine simulates neutron production from D-T fusion by transporting deuterons and sampling D–T reactions. Deuterons are initialized with a specified position and beam energy, traveling in the negative y direction. A maximum free-flight path is derived from the deuteron energy and material density, then used to sample the actual flight path. The stopping power, interpolated from the deuteron energy, reduces the particle’s energy according to the distance traveled, with Bohr straggling included. After each flight, the deuteron’s position is updated and a collision is processed. The scattering angle is calculated using either Rutherford scattering theory or the method of Biersack and Haggmark, depending on the reduced center-of-mass energy. D–T reaction sampling is performed using the tritium cross section, Legendre moments, and the deuteron energy to construct a probability density function (PDF) dependent on emission angle. For each collision, a neutron emission angle is sampled, and the rejection technique is applied to determine whether a reaction occurs. If a reaction is sampled, a neutron is produced and the deuteron transport loop ends; otherwise, the deuteron transport continues. When a D–T neutron is generated, relativistic kinematics determine its energy and direction based on the sampled emission angle and deuteron trajectory. The neutron’s starting position is then sampled within a circular area centered at the specified input position, using the beam width as the radius.

The `SRCDX` subroutine complements  the `SOURCE` subroutine by computing the probability of a neutron reaching a detector (PSC). Its inputs include the distribution of neutron direction cosines, the progenitor deuteron’s direction, and the D–T reaction PDF generated by `SOURCE`. For each starting neutron, the cosine of the angle between the deuteron path and the source-to-detector vector is calculated. The D–T reaction PDF is then interpolated at this cosine and integrated over all incident deuteron energies. A second integral of the PDF is evaluated across all deuteron energies and neutron directions. The PSC is obtained as the ratio of these two integrals.

# How to Compile

To use the `source` and `srcdx` subroutines in the MCNP code version 6.3.1, replace the `source.F90` and `srcdx.F90` in the `mcnp6/Source/src` directory with the two files and compile the code to get the new executable. Information on how to compile the MCNP code is avialable at https://mcnp.lanl.gov/reference_collection.html.

To use the `source` and `srcdx` subroutines with the MCNP code version 6.3.0 (MCNP6.3.0), additional modifications must be made to other files in the MCNP source code to accomodate the use of the modules. In MCNP6.3.0, the `source.F90` and `srcdx.F90` files are not in the modules and thus they are put in the `mcnp_interfaces_mod` module. The `source` and `srcdx` interface subroutines in the `mcnp_interfaces_mod` must be removed. In the the `startp.F90` file, replace the following code `use mcnp_interfaces_mod, only: source` with the following code `use source_mod, only: source`. In the `calcps.F9`0 file, replace the following code `use mcnp_interfaces_mod, only: srcdx` with the following code `use srcdx_mod, only: srcdx`.

# How to input parameters

The `RDUM` and `IDUM` card must be used in an MCNP input file.

* rdum(1) is for deuteron beam energy (MeV)
* rdum(2) is for Tritium/Titanium or Deuterium/Copper atomic ratio
* rdum(3) is an initial distance in x coordinate for a source (cm)
* rdum(4) is a distance in y coordinate for a source (cm)
* rdum(5) is an initial distance in z coordinate for a souce (cm)
* rdum(6) is deuteron beam width (cm)
* idum(1) is a flag, where 1 is for D-T reaction and 2 for D-D reaction
* idum(2) is a source cell; the cell number in an MCNP input file
* idum(3) is the maximum number of iterations for the rejection loop; will set to 1000 if it is less than 1000

# How to Cite

If the source.F90 and srcdx.F90 files have been used, then a following citation of tis use is appreciated.

> M. R. Dzur, J. C. Armstrong, C. A. D'Angelo. "MCNP6 Subsoutine for Simulating a D-T Neutron Source in Ti-T Targets",
> Los Alamos National Laboratory, LA-UR-24-28680, Los Alamaos, NM, USA, August, 2024.
> https://mcnp.lanl.gov/pdf_files/TechReport_2024_LANL_LA-UR-24-28680_DzurArmstrongEtAl.pdf

# Release

This software has been approved for open source release and has been assigned identifier **O5012**.

# Copyright

© 2025. Triad National Security, LLC. All rights reserved.
This program was produced under U.S. Government contract 89233218CNA000001 for Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), which is operated by Triad National Security, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Administration. All rights in the program are reserved by Triad National Security, LLC, and the U.S. Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Administration. The Government is granted for itself and others acting on its behalf a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable worldwide license in this material to reproduce, prepare. derivative works, distribute copies to the public, perform publicly and display publicly, and to permit others to do so.

# License

This program is Open-Source under the BSD-3 License.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

# Trademark Notice

MCNP® and Monte Carlo N-Particle® are registered trademarks owned by Los Alamos National Security, LLC, manager and operator of Los Alamos National Laboratory. Any third party use of such registered marks should be properly attributed to Triad National Security, LLC, including the use of the ® designation as appropriate. Any questions regarding licensing, proper use, and/or proper attribution of Triad National Security, LLC marks should be directed to [trademarks@lanl.gov](mailto:trademarks@lanl.gov).
